---
title: Minimal Command and Control
date: 2025-05-15
categories: ["misc"]
tags: ["c2", "red-team"]
---
# Building Basic Command and Control Server

In order to understand how c2 servers work, I decided to build my on c2 in order to understand the internals of command and control servers. After a few weeks of researching and coding, I came up with a minimal basic c2 and implant. 
#### Goal
Build a working implant in C that connects to a Linux server over TLS and executes remote commands securely.

Please note, Basic-C2 is purely for educational purposes and is not designed for real-world engagements. It's a learning tool, and its basic functionality reflects that.

[You can find the command and control server and implant here](https://github.com/nkatekotibane/Basic-C2/) 
## Overview

### Server Side
The server is really simple. I wrote it for Linux . It sets up a secure TLS listener, accepts incoming connections, and spawns a thread for each client. 
From there:
- Type command
- It sends it to implant via TLS
- The implant executes it
- It sends back the output

The c2 server also has some basic logging functionality.

Thanks to OpenSSL`s abstrations things are a bit simple Here what the setup looks like (TLS listener)

```c
SSL_CTX *ctx = SSL_CTX_new(TLS_server_method());
SSL *ssl = SSL_new(ctx);
SSL_set_fd(ssl, agentSock);
SSL_accept(ssl); // perform tls handshake

```


The server then spins a new thread for each connected client using `pthread`, and each client can receive and execute commands concurrently.

The `host_t` struct keeps track of each agent:
```c
struct host_t {
    char IP[buffer_len];
    int number; // number of implants connected
    int Sock;
    SSL *ssl;
};
```

The shell logic reads commands from the operator and forwards them via `SSL_write()`. The client reads them, runs them, and returns the output.

This is super basic, but it works.

### Client Side (Implant)
I wrote the implant for the windows operating system, the implant basically resembles a backdoor (or a basic RAT). the implant uses Schannel API for encrypted TLS communication. Schannel was really hard to deal with, it took me days to get around. How the implant works: 
- Try to connect to c2 server
- Receive and execute commands using `_popen`
- Send output back to c2 server

Unlike OpenSSL, Schannel doesn’t abstract everything. You manually manage the encryption handshake, message buffers, and stream decryption.
Here is a simple view of how it works:

```c
// setup Schannel credentials
AcquireCredentialsHandle(NULL, UNISP_NAME, SECPKG_CRED_OUTBOUND, ...);
// perform tls handshake
InitializeSecurityContext(...);
// encrypt message
EncryptMessage(&contextHandle, 0, &messageBuffers, 0);
// eecrypt message
DecryptMessage(&contextHandle, &encryptedBuffers, 0, NULL);
```

This gives more control — and more complexity. But it avoids shipping OpenSSL with the implant, keeping it lightweight and native.

## Why I built this
I was curious with how red-team command and control work under the hood.
I wanted to understand the **lower-level mechanics**. Writing this from scratch in C — and with native APIs — gave me deep insight into how TLS, sockets, and remote execution work under the hood.

--- 
This is for educational use only. 

